OSDOCS-7728: Migrate AWS LOAD BALANCER OPERATOR ON ROSA content from MOBB to ROSA docs (#64656)
openshift/openshift-docs: rosa_tutorials/rosa-mobb-aws-load-balancer-operator.adoc

## Prerequisites

* xref:../rosa_install_access_delete_clusters/rosa-sts-creating-a-cluster-quickly.adoc#rosa-sts-creating-a-cluster-quickly[A Multi-AZ ROSA Classic cluster] 
* BYO VPC cluster
* AWS CLI
* OC CLI

## Environment

* Prepare the environment variables:
+
[source,terminal]
----
export AWS_PAGER=""
export ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME=$(oc get infrastructure cluster -o=jsonpath="{.status.infrastructureName}"  | sed 's/-[a-z0-9]\{5\}$//')
export REGION=$(oc get infrastructure cluster -o=jsonpath="{.status.platformStatus.aws.region}")
export OIDC_ENDPOINT=$(oc get authentication.config.openshift.io cluster -o jsonpath='{.spec.serviceAccountIssuer}' | sed  's|^https://||')
export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=$(aws sts get-caller-identity --query Account --output text)
export SCRATCH="/tmp/${ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME}/alb-operator"
mkdir -p ${SCRATCH}
echo "Cluster: ${ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME}, Region: ${REGION}, OIDC Endpoint: ${OIDC_ENDPOINT}, AWS Account ID: ${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}"
----

== AWS VPC / Subnets

[NOTE]
====

> This section only applies to BYO VPC clusters, if you let ROSA create your VPCs you can skip to the following Installation section.

Reviewer: should probably mention specifically this isn't needed if you follow the linked install doc (rosa-sts-creating-a-cluster-quickly)

Reviewer: are we able to collapse this section so it can be opened if needed, but otherwise not shown?  may help with people accidently following the steps.

Author: Thank you! I updated the note, and added put that procedure in a collapsible format. Typically I've only see collapsible tables, but this could be an experimental use for that functionality.

----
+
. Add tags to Public Subnets: 
+
[source,terminal]
----   
$ aws ec2 create-tags \
     --resources ${PUBLIC_SUBNET_IDS} \
     --tags Key=kubernetes.io/role/elb,Value='' \
     --region ${REGION}
----
+
. Add tags to Private Subnets: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ aws ec2 create-tags \
     --resources "${PRIVATE_SUBNET_IDS}" \
     --tags Key=kubernetes.io/role/internal-elb,Value='' \
     --region ${REGION}
----

== Installation

. Create Policy for the AWS Load Balancer Controller: 
+ 
//Get approval from PX for this Github content 
//[NOTE]
//====
//Policy is from [AWS Load Balancer Controller Policy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4.4/docs/install/iam_policy.json) plus subnet create tags permission (required by the operator)
//==== 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc new-project aws-load-balancer-operator
  POLICY_ARN=$(aws iam list-policies --query \
     "Policies[?PolicyName=='aws-load-balancer-operator-policy'].{ARN:Arn}" \
     --output text)
   if [[ -z "${POLICY_ARN}" ]]; then
     wget -O "${SCRATCH}/load-balancer-operator-policy.json" \

>        https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rh-mobb/documentation/main/content/docs/rosa/aws-load-balancer-operator/load-balancer-operator-policy.json

Author: How would you recommend doing this? Should this be a follow-up to this PR?

>        https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rh-mobb/documentation/main/content/docs/rosa/aws-load-balancer-operator/load-balancer-operator-policy.json

Reviewer: We need to ask the owners of https://github.com/openshift/aws-load-balancer-operator to include it there.

There's two Policies (mobb's copy of it merges them for simplicity)   the [controller policy](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.6.0/docs/install/iam_policy.json) and the [operator policy](https://github.com/openshift/aws-load-balancer-operator/blob/main/hack/operator-permission-policy.json)

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="rosa-mobb-aws-load-balancer-operator"]
= AWS Load Balancer Operator on ROSA tutorial
include::_attributes/attributes-openshift-dedicated.adoc[]
:context: rosa-mobb-aws-load-balancer-operator

toc::[]

//Mobb content metadata
//Brought into ROSA product docs 2023-09-12
//---
//date: '2023-01-03T22:07:08.574151'
//title: AWS Load Balancer Operator On ROSA
//aliases: ['/docs/rosa/alb-sts']
//tags: ["AWS", "ROSA"]
//authors:
//  - Shaozhen Ding
//  - Paul Czarkowski
//---

include::snippets/mobb-support-statement.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[TIP]
====

> AWS Load Balancer Operator cannot be used for {product-title} Routes, thus should only be used for individual services or Ingress that does not need the full layer7 capabilties of an {product-title} route.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AWS Load Balancer Operator (ALBO) cannot be used for {product-title} Routes, thus should only be used for individual services or Ingress that does not need the full layer 7 capabilities of a {product-title} route.
```

> Load Balancers created by the AWS Load Balancer Operator (ALBO) cannot be used cannot be used for {product-title} Routes, and should only be used for individual services or Ingress that does not need the full layer 7 capabilties of a {product-title} route.

Reviewer 3: Caught this while looking at this PR as a template/reference:

```suggestion
Load Balancers created by the AWS Load Balancer Operator (ALBO) cannot be used for {product-title} Routes, and should only be used for individual services or Ingress that does not need the full layer 7 capabilties of a {product-title} route.
```

Author: Thank you!

====

> link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/[AWS Load Balancer Controller] is a controller to help manage Elastic Load Balancers for a Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/[AWS Load Balancer Controller] is a controller to help manage Elastic Load Balancing v2 (ELBv2) for a Kubernetes cluster.
```

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure this is valid for ELBv2 only? Also, I don't think we use the term Elastic Load Balancers, I think it is Elastic Load Balancing.

> link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/[AWS Load Balancer Controller] is a controller to help manage Elastic Load Balancing v2 (ELBv2) for a Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ... is a Kubernetes controller that manages ...

> * It satisfies Kubernetes link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/[Ingress resources] by provisioning link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html[Application Load Balancers (ALB)].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It satisfies Kubernetes link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/[Ingress resources] by provisioning link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html[Application Load Balancers (ALB)] and
```

> * It satisfies Kubernetes link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/[Ingress resources] by provisioning link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html[Application Load Balancers (ALB)] and

Reviewer: It satisfies Kubernetes Ingress and Service resources by provisioning ...

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/network/introduction.html[Network Load Balancers (NLB)].

> Compared with default AWS In Tree Provider, this controller is actively developed with advanced annotations for both link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/ingress/annotations/[ALB] and link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/annotations/#lb-type[NLB]. Some advanced usecases are:

Reviewer 2: Would you need to link out to ALB and NLB again?

> Compared with default AWS In Tree Provider, this controller is actively developed with advanced annotations for both link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/ingress/annotations/[ALB] and link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/annotations/#lb-type[NLB]. Some advanced usecases are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compared with default AWS In Tree Provider, this controller is actively developed with advanced annotations for both link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/ingress/annotations/[ALB] and link:https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/annotations/#lb-type[NLB]. Some advanced use cases are:
```

* Using native Kubernetes Ingress with ALB
* Integrate ALB with web application firewall (WAF)
* Specify NLB source IP ranges
* Specify NLB internal IP address

link:https://github.com/openshift/aws-load-balancer-operator[AWS Load Balancer Operator] is used to used to install, manage and configure an instance of `aws-load-balancer-controller` in a OpenShift cluster.

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer: we should probably mention that ALB requires a multi-az cluster, three public subnets split across three AZs in the same VPC as the cluster, and is therefore not suitable for most privatelink clusters.

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/122639474/0dc07610-acc9-4ab1-b013-89b8b9fd6f54)

Reviewer 2: These are the prereqs I was given for ALBO...not sure if they should be the same, but I would think so?

+
[NOTE]
====
If you get an error here wait a minute and try again, it means the Operator has not completed installing yet.
====
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.olm.openshift.io/v1
kind: AWSLoadBalancerController
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  credentials:
    name: aws-load-balancer-operator
EOF
----   
+
. Check the Operator and controller pods are both running:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n aws-load-balancer-operator get pods
----
+
You should see the following, if not wait a moment and retry:
+
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
aws-load-balancer-controller-cluster-6ddf658785-pdp5d            1/1     Running   0          99s
aws-load-balancer-operator-controller-manager-577d9ffcb9-w6zqn   2/2     Running   0          2m4s
----

== Validate the deployment with Echo Server application

. Deploy Echo Server Ingress with ALB: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc new-app -n hello-world --image=docker.io/openshift/hello-openshift
----
+
. Curl the ALB ingress endpoint to verify the echoserver pod is accessible: 
+
[source,termnial]
----

> $ INGRESS=$(oc -n echoserver get ingress echoserver \

Reviewer: Is this valid? the ingress/service would be named `hello-openshift` right ?

    -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
  curl -sH "Host: echoserver.example.com" \
    "http://${INGRESS}" | grep Hostname

  Hostname: echoserver-7757d5ff4d-ftvf2
----
+
. Deploy Echo Server NLB Load Balancer:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: echoserver-nlb
  namespace: echoserver
  annotations:
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: external
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-nlb-target-type: instance
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-scheme: internet-facing
spec:
  ports:
    - port: 80
      targetPort: 8080
      protocol: TCP
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    app: echoserver
EOF
----
+
. Test the NLB endpoint:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ NLB=$(oc -n echoserver get service echoserver-nlb \
  -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
 curl -s "http://${NLB}" | grep Hostname

 Hostname: echoserver-7757d5ff4d-ftvf2
----

> == Clean up

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/assets/122639474/5d5c2fdf-fc58-4be5-bb8f-70d99a48ef51)

Reviewer 2: FWIW, This is what I had for clean up of ALBO, etc.

* It satisfies Kubernetes link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/[Ingress and service resources] by provisioning link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html[Application Load Balancers (ALB)] and
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/network/introduction.html[Network Load Balancers (NLB)].

Compared with default AWS In Tree Provider, this controller is actively developed with advanced annotations for both ALB and NLB. Some advanced use cases are:

* Using native Kubernetes Ingress with ALB
* Integrate ALB with web application firewall (WAF)
* Specify NLB source IP ranges
* Specify NLB internal IP address

link:https://github.com/openshift/aws-load-balancer-operator[ALBO] is used to used to install, manage and configure an instance of `aws-load-balancer-controller` in a OpenShift cluster.

.Prerequisites

[NOTE]
====
ALB requires a multi-AZ cluster, three public subnets split across three AZs in the same VPC as the cluster, and is not suitable for most PrivateLink clusters.
====

> * xref:../rosa_install_access_delete_clusters/rosa-sts-creating-a-cluster-quickly.adoc#rosa-sts-creating-a-cluster-quickly[A multi-AZ ROSA classic cluster] 

Reviewer: this doc creates a default cluster which is single AZ.    We need to tell them to make sure to add `--multi-az` to the rosa create command.

     --tags Key=kubernetes.io/role/internal-elb,Value='' \
     --region ${REGION}
----
====

== Installation

. Create Policy for the ALB Controller: 
+ 
[NOTE]
====
Policy is from link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4.4/docs/install/iam_policy.json[ALB controller policy] plus subnet create tags permission. This is required by the operator.
==== 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc new-project aws-load-balancer-operator
  POLICY_ARN=$(aws iam list-policies --query \
     "Policies[?PolicyName=='aws-load-balancer-operator-policy'].{ARN:Arn}" \
     --output text)
   if [[ -z "${POLICY_ARN}" ]]; then
     wget -O "${SCRATCH}/load-balancer-operator-policy.json" \
       https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rh-mobb/documentation/main/content/docs/rosa/aws-load-balancer-operator/load-balancer-operator-policy.json
     POLICY_ARN=$(aws --region "$REGION" --query Policy.Arn \
     --output text iam create-policy \
     --policy-name aws-load-balancer-operator-policy \
     --policy-document "file://${SCRATCH}/load-balancer-operator-policy.json")
   fi
   echo $POLICY_ARN
----
+
. Create trust policy for ALB Operator: 
+
[source,terminal]
----   

> $ cat <<EOF > "${SCRATCH}/trust-policy.json"

Reviewer: it complains because there's spaces preceeding the json.  this should fix it.

```
cat <<EOF > "${SCRATCH}/trust-policy.json"
{
 "Version": "2012-10-17",
 "Statement": [
 {
 "Effect": "Allow",
 "Condition": {
   "StringEquals" : {
     "${OIDC_ENDPOINT}:sub": ["system:serviceaccount:aws-load-balancer-operator:aws-load-balancer-operator-controller-manager", "system:serviceaccount:aws-load-balancer-operator:aws-load-balancer-controller-cluster"]
   }
 },
 "Principal": {
   "Federated": "arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:oidc-provider/${OIDC_ENDPOINT}"
 },
 "Action": "sts:AssumeRoleWithWebIdentity"
 }
 ]
}
EOF
```

Author: Done

{
 "Version": "2012-10-17",
 "Statement": [
 {
 "Effect": "Allow",
 "Condition": {
   "StringEquals" : {
     "${OIDC_ENDPOINT}:sub": ["system:serviceaccount:aws-load-balancer-operator:aws-load-balancer-operator-controller-manager", "system:serviceaccount:aws-load-balancer-operator:aws-load-balancer-controller-cluster"]
   }
 },
 "Principal": {
   "Federated": "arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:oidc-provider/${OIDC_ENDPOINT}"
 },
 "Action": "sts:AssumeRoleWithWebIdentity"
 }
 ]
}
EOF
----
+
. Create Role for ALB Operator: 
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name "${ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME}-alb-operator" \

Reviewer: this looks to be pasting as a single line which breaks it

```
ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name "${ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME}-alb-operator" --assume-role-policy-document "file://${SCRATCH}/trust-policy.json" --query Role.Arn --output text) echo $ROLE_ARN aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name "${ROSA_CLUSTER_NAME}-alb-operator" --policy-arn $POLICY_ARN
```

+
You should see the following, if not wait a moment and retry:
+
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
aws-load-balancer-controller-cluster-6ddf658785-pdp5d            1/1     Running   0          99s
aws-load-balancer-operator-controller-manager-577d9ffcb9-w6zqn   2/2     Running   0          2m4s
----

== Validate the deployment with Echo Server application

. Deploy Echo Server Ingress with ALB: 
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/main/docs/examples/echoservice/echoserver-namespace.yaml
$ oc adm policy add-scc-to-user anyuid system:serviceaccount:echoserver:default
$ oc apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/main/docs/examples/echoservice/echoserver-deployment.yaml
$ oc apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/main/docs/examples/echoservice/echoserver-service.yaml
$ oc apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/main/docs/examples/echoservice/echoserver-ingress.yaml
----
+

> . Curl the ALB ingress endpoint to verify the echoserver pod is accessible: 

Reviewer: we may need to verify the ALB is ready before issuing these next commands

+

> [source,termnial]

Reviewer: we should have a note that the ALB can take a few minutes to be ready, so if this command fails, they should wait a few minutes and try again.

----
$ INGRESS=$(oc -n echoserver get ingress echoserver \
    -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
  curl -sH "Host: echoserver.example.com" \
    "http://${INGRESS}" | grep Hostname

>   Hostname: echoserver-7757d5ff4d-ftvf2

Reviewer: This is example of the command, and thus should not be in the code block

 Hostname: echoserver-7757d5ff4d-ftvf2

----
+
. Deploy Echo Server NLB Load Balancer:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat << EOF | oc apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: echoserver-nlb
  namespace: echoserver
  annotations:
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: external
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-nlb-target-type: instance
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-scheme: internet-facing
spec:
  ports:
    - port: 80
      targetPort: 8080
      protocol: TCP
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    app: echoserver
EOF
----
+
. Test the NLB endpoint:
+

> [source,terminal]

Reviewer: we should have a note that the ALB can take a few minutes to be ready, so if this command fails, they should wait a few minutes and try again.

----
$ NLB=$(oc -n echoserver get service echoserver-nlb \
  -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
 curl -s "http://${NLB}" | grep Hostname

>  Hostname: echoserver-7757d5ff4d-ftvf2

Reviewer: this `Hostname: ....`  is the output of the command and should not be included in the code block.

we also may need to wait until the NLB is ready before running this command.
